I'm Adrian Higgins I'm a garden
the garden columnist at The Washington Post.
[ Bling sound ]
Today we're going to show viewers
how to simply repot a houseplant.
[ ♬ Happy and calm music in the background ♬ ]
You need to repot a house plant
because in nature, they grow on the jungle floor.
[ ♬ Happy and calm music in the background ♬ ]
But when you grow anything in a pot, in a container,
it's in an artificially constrained environment.
[ ♬ Happy and calm music in the background ♬ ]
And those roots eventually are going to get strangled
upon themselves and spring is the time to do this.
[ ♬ Happy and calm music in the background ♬ ]
Pot up maybe one inch or two inches.
This is a 6-inch pot and today
I'm going to put it into an 8-inch pot.
Key thing is it does have to drain.
[ ♬ Happy and calm music in the background ♬ ]
What I'm going to do now is just start at the bottom
and start teasing the roots away from this form
[ ♬ Happy and calm music in the background ♬ ]
that they have created within the pot.
And I'm just being pretty gentle, but firm enough.
[ ♬ Happy and calm music in the background ♬ ]
I want to stop it growing like a pot.
I want them to think they're back in the jungle.
[ ♬ Happy and calm music in the background ♬ ]
This is pretty much done now.
You can remove up to a quarter of the roots.
[ ♬ Happy and calm music in the background ♬ ]
And it will stress it, yes, but it's not at the moment in spring
where it's ready to grow and it will bounce back.
[ ♬ Happy and calm music in the background ♬ ]
The first thing I want to do is put fresh potting mix
in the bottom, for the roots to grow down into.
[ ♬ Happy and calm music in the background ♬ ]
How much you put in is a direct result
of actually the finished height of the plant,
[ ♬ Happy and calm music in the background ♬ ]
which is very important.
Ideally, you want it pretty much at the level
[ ♬ Happy and calm music in the background ♬ ]
it was at the old pot,
but you want the crown to be maybe at the lip
[ ♬ Happy and calm music in the background ♬ ]
or just below the lip level of the new pot.
And then with my other hand,
[ ♬ Happy and calm music in the background ♬ ]
I'm just throwing in the fresh soil,
which will anchor the plant at the height I want it.
[ ♬ Happy and calm music in the background ♬ ]
You do need to sort of pack it down,
because you don't want air pockets
[ ♬ Happy and calm music in the background ♬ ]
in the root system, that's bad for it.
Okay, that's pretty much where I need it to be.
[ ♬ Happy and calm music in the background ♬ ]
What you should do now is sort of tap
the pot a couple of times.
[ ♬ Happy and calm music in the background ♬ ]
And that helps to set the soil.
I like to groom the leaves, the top growth.
[ ♬ Happy and calm music in the background ♬ ]
SO that it looks as good as it feels.
[chuckles] So I'll take off any brown or yellowing leaves.
[ ♬ Happy and calm music in the background ♬ ]
And to sort of tell the world that I'm back from the groomer's
and I'm like a poodle, all fluffy and happy
[ ♬ Happy and calm music in the background ♬ ]
and ready to go.
And a well-drained pot means that you can't overwater it.
[ ♬ Happy and calm music in the background ♬ ]
The very worst thing you can do is kill it.
And I know that sounds glib.
[ ♬ Happy and calm music in the background ♬ ]
Get your hands mucky, go in and do it.
In time your trepidation will evaporate
[ ♬ Happy and calm music in the background ♬ ]
and your confidence will grow.